Docs/logger readme (#14052)
kyma-project/test-infra: pkg/logger/README.md

# Logger

## Overview

> `pkg/logger` is a structured logging library for GCP-based workloads. It provides a unified logging interface that writes GCP-compatible structured JSON to console (stdout/stderr), directly to the Cloud Logging API, or both — controlled by the `LOG_DESTINATION` environment variable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`pkg/logger` is a structured logging library for GCP-based workloads. It provides a unified logging interface that writes GCP-compatible structured JSON to console (stdout/stderr), directly to the Cloud Logging API, or both — controlled by the **LOG_DESTINATION** environment variable.
```

# Logger

## Overview

`pkg/logger` is a structured logging library for GCP-based workloads. It provides a unified logging interface that automatically routes log entries based on the runtime environment — to console (stdout/stderr) when running on GCP, or directly to the Cloud Logging API when running outside GCP.

> The package was created to satisfy [ADR-006](https://github.tools.sap/kyma/test-infra-fork/blob/main/ADR/decisions/ADR-006-Logging_Standard.md) and replaces direct usage of `go.uber.org/zap` across the codebase.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The package satisfies [ADR-006](https://github.tools.sap/kyma/test-infra-fork/blob/main/ADR/decisions/ADR-006-Logging_Standard.md) and replaces direct usage of `go.uber.org/zap` across the codebase.
```

Reviewer: Please don't link to github.tools.sap from the OS documentation. You might mention the file ADR-006 regarding the logging standard so the authorized user can find it, or drop this bit.

Author: Decided to leave at least mention of ADR without link to internal repository

## Prerequisites

- Go 1.26 or later
- A GCP project with the Cloud Logging API enabled when using `api` or `console-and-api` destination
- [Application Default Credentials](https://cloud.google.com/docs/authentication/application-default-credentials) configured when using `api` or `console-and-api` destination

## Usage

### Basic Setup

Initialize the logger using the `New()` factory function. Configure it using environment variables — no code changes are required between environments.

```go
import "github.com/kyma-project/test-infra/pkg/logger"

log, err := logger.New()
if err != nil {
    panic(err)
}
defer log.Sync()

log.Infow("server started", "port", 8080)
```

### Adding Labels

Labels are indexed and filterable in Cloud Logging. Use them for static metadata such as application name, version, and environment. Use regular key-value pairs for dynamic, per-request data.

```go
log, err := logger.New()
if err != nil {
    panic(err)
}
defer log.Sync()

log = log.With(
    logger.LogLabel("app", "image-builder"),
    logger.LogLabel("version", "1.2.0"),
    logger.LogLabel("environment", "production"),
)

log.Infow("handling request", "request_id", "abc-123")
```

> [!NOTE]

> > ADR-006 requires the following labels on all log entries: `app`, `version`, `environment`. Add them via `logger.LogLabel()` during logger initialization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> ADR-006 requires the following labels on all log entries: `app`, `version`, `environment`. Add them using `logger.LogLabel()` during logger initialization.
```

Reviewer: If you decide not to mention the ADR earlier in the doc, please remove this mention as well.

Author: ADR stays, so i left it with the adjustment

### Child Loggers

Use `With()` to create a child logger that includes additional fields in every subsequent log entry.

```go
log, err := logger.New()
if err != nil {
    panic(err)
}
defer log.Sync()

requestLog := log.With("request_id", "abc-123", "user_id", "42")
requestLog.Infow("processing request")
requestLog.Infow("request completed", "status", 200)
```

## Configuration

| Variable | Required | Default | Description |
|---|---|---|---|
| `LOG_DESTINATION` | No | `auto` | Where to send logs. See [Log Destinations](#log-destinations). |
| `LOG_LEVEL` | No | `info` | Minimum severity: `debug`, `info`, `warn`, `error`, `dpanic`, `panic`, `fatal`. |
| `GCP_PROJECT_ID` | Conditional | — | GCP project ID. Required when `LOG_DESTINATION` is `api` or `console-and-api`. |

> | `GCP_LOG_NAME` | No | `application` | Log name in Cloud Logging. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **LOG_DESTINATION** | No | `auto` | Where to send logs. See [Log Destinations](#log-destinations). |
| **LOG_LEVEL** | No | `info` | Minimum severity: `debug`, `info`, `warn`, `error`, `dpanic`, `panic`, `fatal`. |
| **GCP_PROJECT_ID** | Conditional | — | GCP project ID. Required when **LOG_DESTINATION** is `api` or `console-and-api`. |
| **GCP_LOG_NAME** | No | `application` | Log name in Cloud Logging. |
```

### Log Destinations

| Value | Behavior |
|---|---|
| `auto` | Detects the runtime environment. On GCP → `console`. Outside GCP → `console-and-api`. |
| `console` | Writes structured JSON to stdout/stderr. Use on Cloud Run and GKE — the agent collects stdout automatically. |
| `api` | Sends logs directly to the Cloud Logging API. |
| `console-and-api` | Writes to both stdout/stderr and Cloud Logging API simultaneously. |

> [!TIP]

> > Use `auto` in production. The package detects the runtime environment automatically using the GCP metadata server — no manual configuration needed when deploying to Cloud Run or GKE. The `auto` setting detects the environment by contacting the GCP metadata server on the first run, which may introduce a brief startup delay. To avoid this, you can set `LOG_DESTINATION` to a specific value like `console-and-api`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Use `auto` in production. The package automatically detects the runtime environment using the GCP metadata server — no manual configuration is needed when deploying to Cloud Run or GKE. The `auto` setting detects the environment by contacting the GCP metadata server on the first run, which may introduce a brief startup delay. To avoid this, set **LOG_DESTINATION** to a specific value like `console-and-api`.
```

Author: Completely removed this section, because we do not have `auto` option in the code anymore

## Authentication Outside GCP

> When `LOG_DESTINATION` is `api` or `console-and-api`, the logger requires GCP credentials.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When **LOG_DESTINATION** is `api` or `console-and-api`, the logger requires GCP credentials.
```

**Local development:**
```bash
gcloud auth application-default login
```

> **Container outside GCP:** Mount a service account key with the `roles/logging.logWriter` role:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Container outside GCP:** Mount a service account key with the **roles/logging.logWriter** role:
```

docker run \
  -v /path/to/sa-key.json:/tmp/sa-key.json \
  -e GOOGLE_APPLICATION_CREDENTIALS=/tmp/sa-key.json \
  -e LOG_DESTINATION=console-and-api \
  -e GCP_PROJECT_ID=your-project-id \
  your-image
```

> [!NOTE]
> The GCP client library refreshes credentials automatically. Long-running containers do not require a restart when using Workload Identity Federation with a stable credential source such as AWS or Azure instance metadata.

## Testing

Use `BufferLogger` in unit tests to capture log output without real I/O:

```go
buf := logger.NewBufferLogger()
buf.Infow("something happened", "key", "value")

entries := buf.Entries()
// entries[0].Message == "something happened"
```

## Log Format

All destinations produce the same JSON structure compatible with Cloud Logging structured log ingestion:

```json
{
  "severity": "INFO",
  "timestamp": "2026-04-10T17:49:21Z",
  "message": "server started",
  "port": 8080,
  "logging.googleapis.com/labels": {
    "app": "image-builder",
    "version": "1.2.0",
    "environment": "production"
  },
  "logging.googleapis.com/sourceLocation": {
    "file": "main.go",
    "line": 42,
    "function": "main.main"
  }
}
```

## Related Links

> - [ADR-006 Logging Standard](https://github.tools.sap/kyma/test-infra-fork/blob/main/ADR/decisions/ADR-006-Logging_Standard.md)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
